The tributaries of rivers Ganga and Brahmaputra together form the Ganga-Brahmaputra basin in the
Indian subcontinent . The basin lies in the sub-tropical region that is situated between 10°N to 30°N
latitudes. The tributaries of the River Ganga like the Ghaghra, the Son, the Chambal, the Gandak,
the Kosi and the tributaries of Brahmaputra drain it. The plains of the Ganga and the Brahmaputra,
the mountains and the foothills of the Himalayas and the Sundarbans delta are the main features of
this basin. Ox-bow lakes dot the plain area. The area is dominated by monsoon climate. The
monsoon brings rains from mid-June to mid-September. The summers are hot and the winters cool.
The basin area has varied topography. The environment plays a dominant role in the distribution of
the population. The mountain areas with steep slopes have inhospitable terrain. Therefore less
number of people live in the mountain area of the GangaBrahmaputra basin. The plain area provides
the most suitable land for human habitation. The soil is fertile. Agriculture is the main occupation of
the people where flat land is available to grow crops. The density of population of the plains is very
high. The main crop is paddy. Since cultivation of paddy requires sufficient water, it is grown in the
areas where the amount of rainfall is high. Wheat, maize, sorghum, gram and millets are the other
crops that are grown. Cash crops like sugarcane and jute are also grown. Banana plantations are
seen in some areas of the plain. In West Bengal and Assam tea is grown in plantations. Silk is
produced through the cultivation of silk worms in parts of Bihar and Assam. In the mountains and
hills, where the slopes are gentle, crops are grown on terraces. The vegetation cover of the area
varies according to the type of landforms. In the Ganga and Brahmaputra plain tropical deciduous
trees grow, along with teak, sal and peepal. Thick bamboo groves are common in the Brahmaputra
plain. The delta area is covered with the mangrove forests. In parts of Uttarakhand, Sikkim and
Arunachal Pradesh, coniferous trees like pine, deodar and fir can be seen because the climate is cool
and the slopes are steep. There is a variety of wildlife in the basin. Elephants, tigers, deer and
monkeys are common. The one-horned rhinoceros is found in the Brahmaputra plain. In the delta
area, Bengal tiger and crocodiles are found. Aquatic life abounds in the fresh river waters, the lakes
and the Bay of Bengal Sea. The most popular varieties of the fish are the rohu, catla and hilsa. Fish
and rice is the staple diet of the people living in the area. The Ganga-Brahmaputra plain has several
big towns and cities. The cities of Allahabad, Kanpur, Varanasi, Lucknow, Patna and Kolkata all
with the population of more than ten lakhs are located along the River Ganga. The wastewater from
these towns and industries is discharged into the rivers. This leads to the pollution of the rivers. All
the four ways of transport are well developed in the Ganga-Brahmaputra basin. In the plain areas
the roadways and railways transport the people from one place to another. The waterways, is an
effective means of transport particularly along the rivers. Kolkata is an important port on the River
Hooghly. The plain area also has a large number of airports. Tourism is another important activity of
the basin. Taj Mahal on the banks of River Yamuna in Agra, Allahabad on the confluence of the
Rivers Ganga and Yamuna, Buddhists stupas in Uttar Pradesh and Bihar, Lucknow with its
Imambara, Assam with Kaziranga and Manas with wild life sanctuaries and Arunachal Pradesh with
a distinct tribal culture are some of the places worth a visit